<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Endnotes</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="backmatter">
		<section id="endnotes" epub:type="endnotes">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Endnotes</h2>
			<ol>
				<li id="note-1" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See the article “On the role of the Communist Party in the Proletarian Revolution,” in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Theses Presented to the Second Congress of the Communist International</i>, Petrograd-Moscow, <time datetime="1920-07-18">18 July, 1920</time>⁠—a valuable work which I possess only in French. <a href="chapter-1-2.xhtml#noteref-1" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Electrification is desired not merely for reorganizing industry, but in order to industrialize agriculture. In <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Theses Presented to the Second Congress of the Communist International</i> (an instructive little book, which I shall quote as <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Theses</i>), it is said in an article on the Agrarian question that Socialism will not be secure till industry is reorganized on a new basis with “general application of electric energy in all branches of agriculture and rural economy,” which “alone can give to the towns the possibility of offering to backward rural districts a technical and social aid capable of determining an extraordinary increase of productivity of agricultural and rural labour, and of engaging the small cultivators, in their own interest, to pass progressively to a collectivist mechanical cultivation” (<abbr>p.</abbr> 36 of French edition). <a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-2" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-3" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Theses</i> (<abbr>p.</abbr> 34) it is said: “It would be an irreparable error⁠ ⁠… not to admit the gratuitous grant of part of the expropriated lands to poor and even well-to-do peasants.” <a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-3" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-4" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Theses</i> (<abbr>p.</abbr> 6 of French edition) it is said:</p>
					<blockquote>
						<p>The ancient classic subdivision of the Labour movement into three forms (parties, trade unions, and cooperatives) has served its time. The proletarian revolution has raised up in Russia the essential form of proletarian dictatorship, the soviets. But the work in the Soviets, as in the industrial trade unions which have become revolutionary, must be invariably and systematically directed by the party of the proletariat, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> the Communist Party. As the organized advanced guard of the working class, the Communist Party answers equally to the economic, political and spiritual needs of the entire working class. It must be the soul of the trade unions, the soviets, and all other proletarian organizations.</p>
						<p>The appearance of the Soviets, the principal historical form of the dictatorship of the proletariat, in no way diminishes the directing role of the party in the proletarian revolution. When the German Communists of the ‘Left’⁠ ⁠… declare that ‘the party itself must also adapt itself more and more to the Soviet idea and proletarianize itself,’ we see there only an insinuating expression of the idea that the Communist Party must dissolve itself into the Soviets, so that the Soviets can replace it.</p>
						<p>This idea is profoundly erroneous and reactionary.</p>
						<p>The history of the Russian Revolution shows us, at a certain moment, the Soviets going against the proletarian party and helping the agents of the bourgeoisie.⁠ ⁠…</p>
						<p>In order that the Soviets may fulfil their historic mission, the existence of a Communist Party, strong enough not to ‘adapt’ itself to the Soviets but to exercise on them a decisive influence, to force them <em>not to adapt themselves</em> to the bourgeoisie and official social democracy,⁠ ⁠… is on the contrary necessary.</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-4" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-5" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The ninth Communist Congress (March⁠–⁠April, 1920) says on this subject: “In view of the fact that the first condition of the success of the Soviet Republic in all departments, including the economic, is chiefly systematic printed agitation, the Congress draws the attention of the Soviet Government to the deplorable state in which our paper and printing industries find themselves. The ever decreasing number of newspapers fail to reach not only the peasants but even the workers, in addition to which our poor technical means render the papers hardly readable. The Congress strongly appeals to the Supreme Council of Public Economy, to the corresponding Trade Unions and other interested institutions, to apply all efforts to raise the quantity, to introduce general system and order in the printing business, and so secure for the worker and peasant in Russia a supply of Socialist printed matter.” <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-5" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
			</ol>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
